.PL 33
.MT 3
.MB 4
.OP
world.   There  is also a shortage of fossil fuels.   We need  to 

find alternative fuels or means of transportation if we are going 
to  keep our environment clean and save what fossil fuels we have 

left.
     There  are  two ways we can do this.   One  is  using  solar 

powered  cars,  and  the other is using hydrogen in our  vehicles 
instead of gasoline.  "A solar powered car is a car that utilizes 

the  long  wave radiation from the sun through the use  of  solar 
cells  to power an electric motor.   This motor then  drives  the 

car"  (Woodard and Chester 66).  "A hydrogen powered car is a car 
uses  hydrogen as a fuel to drive the car" (Templeman and  Miller 

59).
    "By the year 2030 there will be one billion cars on the road" 

(Templeman and Miller 59).  This means more fossil fuels will  be 
used than ever.  "Vehicles account for most of the energy used in 

the  carriage  of freight and people" (Templeman and Miller  59).  
There is also more than just using up resourses.   There is  also 

the  cost.   Oil is about $20.00 a barrel.   However,   there are 
also an additional costs.  The cost of defending the oil and  the 

damage it does to the environment.  After these factors are added 
in,  a  very  subjective  cost of oil $43.50 a  barrel  has  been 

derived (Hubbard 36).   This is by no means cheap.  Consider that 
the  defence department has spent $15 to 45 billion defending the 

oil  in the Persian Gulf.   The U.S.  has taken some measures  to 
help this,   but we can only do so much.  We will eventually need 

to find alternative. Alternative fuels will eventually need to be 

found. If the industralized world began to use hydrogen and solar 
powered cars,  a significant reduction in the use of fossil fuels 

could  be  acheived.  "The U.S.  has the highest per  capita  car 
ownership in the world.  Its per capita ownership is 25  percent" 

(Pytte Newsbank).  In addition to the number of cars, the U.S.has 
some of the most inefficient cars. In the last ten years, the gas 

consumption per mile as decreased by half in new cars. So we have 
come  a  long way.  In Germany it has fallen a quarter below  our 

half (Reignshaw 30). This proves that we still have a long way to 
go.  But even if we cut down on fossil fuel consumption by  cars, 

we  will still run out of oil with the if the expected 1  billion 
cars are on the road.
     Hydrogen and solar powered cars may provide the answer.  The 

only  fossil  fuels that would be consumed are those used in  the 
production of electricity. The use of fossil fuels in this manner 

is efficient.  "The only other fossil fuels it would use would be 
for the lubrication of parts" (Templeman and Wilson 91). There is 

no  fossil fuels involved in powering the car.  A solar car  uses 
sunlight  which  falls on the roof and hood of the car  which  is 

covered   with  silicon  cells  to   produce   electricity.   The 
electricity  is then stored in batteries.  The stored electricity 

is then used to operate a motor in car. The electricity is stored 
during the time the car is parked in the sunlight as well when it 

is  operated  on the road.  The batteries  are  normally  charged 
during  the night to provide additional power during the day when 

the sun is clouded,  when the loads are heavy climbing a hill  or 

passing  a truck.  In Switzerland cars of this type are used  and 
electrical  outlets  are  provided in some parking lots  so  that 

batteries may be charged while at work. 
 
     A  hydrogen car powered car works much like  a  conventional 

car  except  that hydrogen is placed in the gas tank  instead  of 
gasoline.  BMW has a few prototypes already built.  In fact,  the 

hydrogen  engines were converted from gasoline engines (Templeman 
and Miller 59).  The difficult part is handling the hydrogen. The 

production of hydrogen is simple. Most high school students do it 
in their science classes.  The process is called electrolysis. To 

produce  hydrogen  all one needs to do is to pass  an  electrical 
current through water.  Water is made of one oxygen atom and  two 

hydrogen  atoms.  The  current seperates the hydrogen and  oxygen 
atoms. After the atoms have been seperated, the hydrogen is piped 

into large tanks and stored for use in hydrogen cars.  The oxygen 
has  many medical and commerical uses and would be  a  profitable 

byproduct. Even if it were released into the air it would be be a 
benefit to the environment. 
     Finding  a  cheap  and  easy source of  electricity  is  the 

difficult  part of this process.  Scientists are considering  the 
use  of large solar power plants to produce the enery  needed  to 

power the electrolisis.   The solar energy falling on 1/1000th of 
the  surface of the earth harvested with an efficiency of only 10 

percent  equals the entire power consumption of  the  earth.  The 
earth uses 350 exajoules per year (Dostrovsky 102).  One exajoule 

is  the amount of energy that is released when 22 million tons of 

oil are burned.
 
     Not  only do we need to worry about the depletion of  fossil 

fuels, but we must worry about pollution. Pollution is one of the 
we  have  the "greenhouse effect".  This effect is caused  by  an 

excessive amounts of carbon dioxide.  Cars produce 14 percent  of 
all  the  carbon dioxide half of the oxides of nitrogen and  two-

thirds  of the carbon monoxides created on the  earth  (Templeman 
and Miller 60).  Futhermore an average car can produce 400 pounds 

of  carbon  dioxide from one tank of gasoline.  Now  imagine  the 
volume of carbon dioxide from the 1 billion cars in 2030. If each 

car  burned one tank of fuel it would produce and additional  400 
billion   pounds.   That   is  20  million  tons  added  to   the 

11,859,805,900 tons already in the air.  This value was  computed 
by  multiplying 14.7 pounds per square inch which is the pressure 

of the atmosphere on the surface of the earth by the area of  the 
earth multiplied by the percent of carbon dioxide in the air(Hess 

9).
 
This  is  very bad.  What forests have not been been cut down  by 

then  could not keep up with the all that carbon  dioxide.  There 
may  not even be an ozone layer by then.  This is of  course  the 

most extreme possibility, but one billion cars are going to do an 
enormous amount of damage to the ozone layer. This is why we need 

to stop using fossil fuels in automobiles.   There will simply be 

to  much smog pollution.   Improving smog control can only do  so 
much.   Cars get old and put out more smog.   What is smog?  Smog 

is when gasoline is not burned completely away in an engine. This 
waste is in the form of hydrocarbons,  carbon dioxide,  and a few 

other  compounds.   These gases are partially burned away by  the 
smog  equipment on the car.   This is done by pumping the exhaust 

gases back into the carburetor.   After this is done,   the gases 
run  through  the engine again.   Next,   the gases go  into  the 

tailpipe where they are burned in the catalytic converter.   This 
whole process gets rid of some of the smog that the car puts out.  

However,   there are a few drawbacks to all this smog  equipment. 
One  is  that it saps power from the engine because of the  added 

friction from driving smog pumps.  The other is smog equipment is 
hard to work on if it malfunctions.   So far this is the only way 

that  has been found to get rid of the exhaust gases produced  by 
driving.   Smog  pumps and catalitic converters are by  no  means 

very effective.  As a mater of fact,  a short twenty minute drive 
can  produce up to fourteen pounds of carbon dioxide (Miller 59).  

We need to do better than that if we expect to have clean air  in 
the  future.   We need to find alternative fuels because there is 

not much more we can do with fossil fuels to make less  pollution 
when they are burned. 
     The  advantage of hydrogen and solar powered cars is they do 

not  put  out pollution.   In a hydrogen powered  car,  the  only 
exhaust  left over after the fuel has been burned is water  vapor 

(Templeman  and Miller 60).   Water is non  polluting.   A  solar 

powered  car uses only the enexaustible and nonpolluting resourse 
of sunshine (Woodard and Kyle 69).   A solar powered car does not 

burn  anything,  so  it  can not pollute.   This  eliminates  the 
problem  of  trying to control the amount of smog cars  put  out.      
     The  state of technology today in this field is  progressing 

rapidly.   In  hydrogen technology,   BMW has produced  two  735i 
models  which  run on liquid hydrogen (Templeman and Miller  60).  

This  form of fuel is not without some major  drawbacks  however.  
One  major  problem is the cost.   It is going to cost a  lot  of 

money  to convert service stations over to using hydrogen.   Also 
the  special tanks are expensive to produce.   There is also  the 

additional  cost  of  the electricity  used  for  extracting  the 
hydrogen from the water.  In addition to the cost is the question 

of safety.   Hydrogen is very dangerous to handle.   If a drop of 
hydrogen  were to fall on ones foot they would get a severe  case 

of frostbite because the temperature of this liquid is minus  425 
degrees  F.   Also  it is a very explosive fuel.   If it were  to 

ingite  it will cause the "Hindenburg effect".   As far as  solar 
powered cars several have been produced.   One called  Sunraycer,  

has been produced by the funding of General Motors.  This car was 
not produced as a prototype however.  Rather it was made to win a 

solar powered car race in Australia.  However all the concepts of 
a solar powered car are there.     
     The  solar  car is not without its disadvantages  either.The 

battery  remains as one of the major problems in the use of  this 
type  of car.  Batteries are heavy for the amount of energy  that 

can be contained in them.  The lead acid battery that is used  in 

the  standard car today holds only about 200 watt-hours of power. 
New  batteries  based on air-zinc and other types  of  technology 

will  improve  on  the  storage  capacity  of  the  battery.  The 
Sunraycer used silver-zinc batteries that held 3000 watt-hours of 

energy and weighed 60 pounds (Wilson 93).  The second drawback of 
the  battery  is the long time that it takes to "refuel"  if  the 

vehicle  is empty.  Using electronics that would permit  charging 
all  the batteries in parallel,  it would still require over  one 

half our to charge a car in the best case. Charging at these high 
rates  adversely  effects the useful life of  the  battery.  This 

problem  has been addressed by Japan in a very  interesting  way. 
They  have  developed an accumlator or capacitor that has a  very 

large capacity for the storage of electric charge.  The advantage 
of  the accumlator is that it can be charges at a very fast  rate 

since it does not depend upon a slow chemical reaction to charge. 
The  disadvantage  of the accumlator is that in  a  accident  the 

entire power stored in the accumlator can be released in a single 
second which will vaporize a lot of metal.
 
     In  conclusion,   these  technologies of hydrogen and  solar 

power  as forms of propulsion will prevent the introduction of  a 
large  amount of hydrocarbons into the atmosphere and reduce  the 

usage  of  fossil fuels.  There is still a lot  of  research  and 
development  that  needs to be done to make these  concepts  work 

well enough to be accepted by the public.   

   
 
                          Works Sighted
Bleviss, Deborah L. and Peter Walzer. "Energy for Motor Vehicles"      

     Scientific American, September 1990: 102-109
 
Dostrovsky,   Israel.   "Chemical  Fuels from the Sun" Scientific      

     American, Dec. 1991: 102-107. 
 
Hess,  Seymour L.   Introduction to Theoretical Meteorology.  New 

     York:      Henry Holt and Co., 1959.
 
Hubbard,   Harold  M.   "The  Real  Cost  of  Energy"  Scientific 

     American,      April 1991: 36-42.
 
Pytte,    Alyson.    Congressional   Quarterly   Weekly   Report. 

     Congressional      Inc, Oct. 27, 1990.
 
Templeman,  John and Karen Lowy Miller. "Fill'er Up-With Hydrogen      

     Please" Business Week, Mar. 4, 1991:59-60.
 
Reighnshaw,  Greg.  "Cars,  How  Bad  Are They?"  Environment,  April           

     1981:27-32.
 
  
Wilson,   Howard  G.,   Paul  B.   MacCready,  and  Chester  R.  Kyle.      

     "Lessons of Sunraycer" Scientific American, Mar 1989: 90-97.
 
Woodard,   Brian   and   Chester  Kyle.   "New  Solar  Cells  Win   In      

     Australia" Popular Mechanics, Feb. 1991: 65-69 and 92.
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
  
           
